Cambridge Discovery readers, starter level, Gone by Margaret Johnson, published by Cambridge
University Press.
This recording is copyright.
Chapter One, Birthday Boy I'm sorry I'm working on your birthday, Tom.
Tom's mother is leaving the house. She isn't looking at Tom. She's thinking about work.
Have a nice day, love. See you tonight, she says.
Goodbye mum, Tom says. He feels sad. He doesn't want her to go.
Tom's sister, Annie, comes down from her room.
Happy birthday, little brother, she says. 12 today.
Tom smiles. He likes being 12.
Can I give you your birthday present this afternoon? Annie asks. I'm going shopping
this morning with my friends. She goes to the door.
I want to go shopping. Tom starts to say, but Annie doesn't hear.
Enjoy your birthday, she says. Then she leaves too.
Now Tom's father is the only person at home. Tom finds him at his desk. He's working on
his computer. Tom's father works at home and he works all the time.
Tom walks into his father's office and his father turns and looks at him.
Hello, Tom, he says. What are you going to do with your birthday money?
I don't know, Dad. Tom says. Can we go shopping?
Tom's father is looking at his computer again.
Not today, Tom, he says. I must finish this work. Where's Annie?
She's shopping with her friends, Tom says. He knows his father isn't listening. He's reading
an email on his computer. That's nice, he says. But he doesn't look at Tom. Have a good time.
Okay, says Tom and he leaves the room. Tom phones his friend, Neil. Neil's mother answers.
Can I speak to Neil? Tom asks. I'm sorry, Neil's mother says. He's playing football in Winston Park.
Is that Tom? Yes, says Tom. Neil tells me it's your birthday today, Neil's mother says.
Happy birthday. Thank you, says Tom. I must go, but have a good day, says Neil's mother.
Thank you, Tom says again, and he puts the phone down.
No one has any time for me today, he thinks. It's my birthday and no one has any time for me.
Chapter 2. The Camera
Tom leaves the house and walks to Winston Park. He doesn't like football, but he wants to be with
people. It's a hot day. In Winston Park, there are lots of mothers and fathers with their children.
Boys and girls are running and laughing. Everyone looks happy.
Tom sees Neil and some more boys. They're playing football.
Tom goes over. Neil sees him. He smiles. Hello, Tom. He calls. Happy birthday.
Thank you, Tom calls, but Neil is running to get the ball.
Tom watches the game for 10 minutes, but Neil doesn't speak to him again.
Neil's good at football, and he's enjoying the game.
Tom starts walking across Winston Park. He sits down on a seat and takes a drink from his bag.
He puts his bag down. There is another bag under the seat. What's this?
thinks Tom. The bag is black. Tom opens it. He's looking for a name.
There is only one thing in the bag. A camera. Tom takes it out.
Then he looks in the bag again, but there is nothing in it. No name.
Tom looks at the camera. There are four buttons. Photo, delete, on, and off.
Tom puts his finger on the on button and presses it. The camera makes a noise.
The black bag is on the seat. Tom can see it in the camera.
Tom puts his finger on the photo button. He presses it. The camera makes another noise.
Tom looks at the photo of the bag. It's okay, but he doesn't want a photo of a bag,
so he presses the delete button. The photo goes away.
This camera is okay, Tom thinks. But it isn't my camera.
I must take it to the police. I can buy a camera with my birthday money.
Tom puts out his hand to take the camera bag from the seat, but the bag isn't there.
He looks under the seat. No bag. He looks behind the seat.
No bag. Tom doesn't understand. Where is the bag? He thinks.
A squirrel runs in front of the seat. Tom wants a photo of it. The squirrel stops.
It's looking for food, Tom thinks. He smiles and presses the photo button.
But when he looks at the photo, it isn't good.
Squirrels are too fast for photos, Tom thinks. He presses the delete button.
The photo of the squirrel goes away. When Tom looks for the squirrel, he can't see it.
Squirrels run fast, Tom thinks. But not that fast. Where is it?
Tom looks at the camera. He doesn't understand. Something is wrong.
He wants to try the camera again. There are some flowers next to his seat.
Tom looks at the camera again. He can see the flowers.
He presses the photo button and takes a photo of the flowers.
Then he presses the delete button to make the photo go away.
Tom takes the camera away from his face. He looks for the flowers. They aren't there.
The flowers are gone, he thinks. Gone.
Chapter 3. Where's the ball?
Tom puts the camera down. He doesn't want it in his hands now. He feels afraid.
He thinks about the camera bag, the squirrel and the flowers.
When I take photos of things with this camera, they go away. He thinks, I don't know how, but they do.
Across Winston Park, he can see the boys playing football.
I must tell Neil about this, he thinks. He puts the camera in his bag and starts running across the park.
But after a minute, he stops running.
He thinks about the camera bag, the squirrel and the flowers.
He's near the boys now. It's my birthday, he thinks.
I want Neil to come to the shops with me. We can get a pizza. I can buy something with my birthday money.
A boy in a blue t-shirt has the ball now. He's running fast. Then everyone shouts,
go. Lots of the boys run to the boy in the blue t-shirt. They are all very happy.
Tom quickly takes the camera from the bag and looks into it. He can see the ball.
He presses the photo button and then the delete button. The boys want to start playing again.
Hey, shouts the boy in the blue t-shirt. Where's the ball?
No one can understand. They look on the grass and behind trees.
Can you see the ball, Tom? Neil asks.
No, sorry, Tom says. I don't know where the ball is. I don't think you can play now.
Do you want to get a pizza with me? I can buy something to eat with my birthday money.
But Neil doesn't hear Tom. He's listening to the boy in the blue t-shirt.
It's okay, he says. I've got another ball in my bag.
Good, says Neil. But where is our other ball? I don't know, says the boy.
He gets the new ball from his bag. They start to play again.
Tom thinks about taking a new photo. A photo of the new ball.
But the boys run away across the grass and Tom turns and starts to walk home.
Chapter four, the computer.
When Tom gets home, his father is making a coffee.
Tom, is that you? He calls.
Yes, Tom answers. Do you want a coffee? His father asks.
No, thank you, answers, Tom. I'm just getting something from my room.
Tom quickly runs up to his father's office. It's the room with the computer.
He takes the camera from his bag. He can see the computer in it.
He quickly presses photo, then delete.
He looks at the table. No computer. Good, he thinks.
Tom's father comes into the room with his coffee. He smiles at Tom.
Okay, he asks. Then he stops smiling. Where's my computer? He asks.
I don't know, says Tom. I don't understand.
Tom's father says. Where is it? He looks behind Tom.
He looks under the table. He looks all over the room. Then he looks at Tom.
Tom, he says. Where's my computer? I don't know, answers, Tom.
Computers don't just go. Tom's father says. Yes, they do, thinks Tom.
Then he looks at his father. Can we go to the shops, Dad? He asks.
No, Tom, his father says. I must find my computer. I'm going to phone the police.
After the police come, Tom says. Can we go to the shops then?
But Tom's father can't stop thinking about his computer.
Please, Tom, he says. He looks tired. I know it's your birthday, but all my work is on that computer.
It's very important. I don't know what to do.
Tom looks at his father.
I'm sorry, Dad, he says. His father smiles a little.
It's okay, son, he says. Go and enjoy your birthday.
Tom leaves the room. I can't enjoy my birthday, he thinks. No one has any time for me.
Tom goes to his room and sits on his bed. Then he thinks about his mother and he knows what he
wants to do. Chapter 5 Trying to Help
Tom leaves the house and walks to his mother's cafe, Kathy's coffee shop.
The cafe sells food all day. Lots of people go there on Saturdays.
Tom can see his mother in the cafe. She looks hot. There are people at all the tables and they're
all waiting for their food. Mum's tired, Tom thinks. She works a lot. He goes into the cafe.
His mother sees him. Hello, Tom, she says. Why are you here on your birthday?
I'm here to help you, he says. His mother smiles.
Oh, thank you, Tom, she says. People want plates and cups for their food and drinks,
she says. They're all dirty. She takes Tom to the dirty plates and cups in the kitchen.
Can you wash them for me? She asks. Tom smiles. Of course, he says. Tom's mother smiles again.
You're a good boy, she says. Then she leaves the kitchen.
Tom quickly takes the camera from his bag.
I can have an afternoon with mum, he thinks. We can go to a restaurant or watch a film.
He can see the dirty cups and plates in the camera. He presses photo, then delete.
Then he takes the camera away and looks.
Gone, he thinks. They're gone. And he smiles.
His mother comes back into the kitchen. She looks all over the room.
Tom, she says. Where are the cups and plates? Tom thinks for a few seconds.
It's the camera, he tells her. When I take a photo, things go away.
His mother looks at him. She looks very tired now.
What? She asks. I don't understand. The camera, Tom starts. But his mother speaks.
Tom, she says. There aren't any plates or cups and there are lots of people in the cafe.
What am I going to do? Close the cafe mum.
Close the cafe mum. Tom says. We can go out. His mother is angry now.
I can't close the cafe, Tom. She says. This is my job.
Now please, tell me where the cups and plates are.
I don't know mum. Tom starts saying. It's the camera.
The door opens. Tom's sister comes in.
Hello, she says. What's wrong?
Tom's mother starts telling Annie about the plates and cups.
But Annie isn't listening. She sees Tom's camera.
What's this? She says. And takes it from her brother.
Is it new? Give it to me. Tom says. Annie doesn't listen.
She puts the camera to her eye. She looks at Tom. Smile, she says.
No, Tom shouts. Annie presses the photo button.
Give the camera to me, Annie. Tom shouts. Annie looks at the photo.
This isn't a good photo of you, Tom. Annie says. No, don't press any buttons.
Shouts, Tom. But it's too late. Annie presses. Delete.